Welcome back!
Let's move on to monitoring
Quarkus microservices,
where we are going to look at how to
generate metrics using micrometer add-on
the micrometer extension, and have
a guided exercise about that.
And then we are going to also look
at how to trace traffic between
microservices using SmallRye OpenTracing extension.
There is an exercise about that as well.
As usual at the end of
chapter we have a review lab.
It's critical that we can
monitor our applications,
especially when running in production.
And it gives us incredible insights into
what exactly it is that those applications
are facing in terms of workloads.
And of course then subsequently
also allows us to optimize them
according to where their stress areas are.
Now to collect metrics,
there are several different ways,
especially when running in OpenShift
or any other Kubernetes based platform.
There are add-ons such as Prometheus that
are or can be configured
to automatically collect
metrics, that our
applications can provide and
then allow us to build dashboards
which give us some timeline
and trend based insights.
Quarkus provides the quarkus-micrometer extension,
which gives us an API,
which is essentially a MicroProfile metrics compatible API.
And on the other side produces metrics
output automatically
registers some endpoints
in the application and produces
output that can be digested
by Prometheus when collecting
information about our application.
We can integrate those
metrics with Prometheus using
a quarkus-micrometer-registry-prometheus extension.
And essentially that causes the metrics
to be output in a special format
that Prometheus recognizes as its own,
and then allows us to obviously also diagram,
visually display those metrics
in tools like Grafana. quarkus-
micrometer extension enables you
to collect both the built-in metrics,
also known as the base runtime metrics.
Such as for example,
Java virtual machines, memory utilization,
garbage collection statistics,
thread information,
but also system load
averages and other info.
And then on the other hand, the
application custom metrics related to
business logic using data
types like counters,
timers, gauges, and summaries.
There are 4 different metric types
that Prometheus supports.
And of course, the micrometer extension
enables, what is called a counter.
A counter is always growing,
metrics are cumulative,
metric that represents
a single variable that is either set to
0 initially or to some specific value,
and then only increases
throughout the lifetime.
You can use a counter, for example, to
represent the number of
invocations of a method,
the number of requests served,
the number of errors
encountered, and so on.
And then a similar,
albeit slightly different metric
type is called the gauge.
A guage is opposed to a counter,
can both grow and decrease and
it's basically a snapshot of a certain
value in time, such as, for example,
the number of requests in a queue,
the number of sessions
currently registered,
the number of records in
a database and so on.
These values
can change in time both upwards and
downwards and guage is the type that you can,
use to represent that.
Histogram is a sample,
basically it's a type of sampling.
It collects information and then
sorts them in configurable buckets.
It also provides a sum of all values.
You could use a histogram,
for example, to aggregate requests,
if you are, for example,
timing your request,
you can use a histogram to aggregate
requests based on percentiles
or for example,
based on the amount of time that it
took for a request to be completed,
such as say request that
took less than a 100 milliseconds between 100 and half a second and over half a second.
And these will be categories
in the histogram.
And of course, each will
represent the number of requests
that fall into each category
and then you have also, we
could get an average out of
it and similar aggregations.
A summary is similar to a histogram.
It's samples values.
However, a summary also calculates
configurable values over
sliding time window.
Now, the difference, the
important difference also is
that histogram buckets are
categorized on Prometheus server,
whereas the summary is
calculated on the client side.
So you have much more control
in configuring a summary
as opposed to a histogram.
If you want to enable metrics in Quarkus,
you simply have to add
the micrometer-registry-prometheus
extension to your pom.xml,
either using quarkus:add-extension or manually.
Then import the required classes that
you will use in your service.
And most importantly, to
register those meters,
you need an instance of
the MeterRegistry class,
which you can simply inject
into your code like this.
So once you have injected
the MeterRegistry,
you can add relevant metrics
by simply annotating
your methods and choosing
what kind of a metric they are
going to be associated with.
You generally give the metric a name,
an optional description
and then for a specific metric types,
there are also additional
fields that you can configure.
Instead of using an annotation,
you can also register a
specific counter by asking the registry
to give you an instance of it.
So again, the counter in this case,
will have a name and a description
and would give you an instance of
an counter object which you can then
manipulate whenever you need to, manually.
Timers are also interesting metric.
You can annotate methods as timed methods.
In that case, there will be a timer
associated with the method that will
show you what is the execution
time of that method.
But you can also ask for
timers to be given to you,
asking a metering registry.
So just basically invoking the
timer method and configuring it.
What would that do?
Just like in the previous counter example,
it will give you a timer instance,
which you can then invoke by setting
the record methods parameter to a lambda,
which is essentially the
code that you want to time,
the code that you want to execute and
express how much time it took to execute.
So in addition to using this
shorthand lambda expression,
you can also provide a supplier to the
timer by again asking the registry
to give you a timer and
then immediately appending
a wrap method whereby you
use a method reference.
And this causes basically this method to
execute and return to you the
amount of time that it took
of course. You can also record the
runnable interface implementation.
You can record a callable.
So there are many different
ways you can recall
the amount of time that a
method invocation takes.
As we say, gauges are
used to track the count,
they can either increase or decrease.
So you can request gauges
from the registry again,
specify what kind of a datatype
they are going to be using
and then simply set the value explicitly
whenever it needs to be set
or you can also configure a gauge,
for example to monitor the size,
the current size of a collection by
invoking the gaugeCollectionSize,
giving it a name,
and specifying what collection
you want to measure.
As we said, gauges are
used for quantities that
have variable non-monotonic tendency,
but a variable one, they can
both increase and decrease.
And generally gauges have an upper bound.
If you want to monitor something
that monotonically increases,
then you should be using a counter.
By default, Quarkus makes
the metrics available at
the /q/metrics endpoint
in plain text Prometheus data format.
If you want the metrics
endpoint to produce JSON,
you can add the quarkus.micrometer.export.
json.enabled property to
your application.properties file and set that to true,
which will switch to JSON
instead of Prometheus format,
Let's have a look at how to add
metrics your microservice
in the next exercise.